From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
Today's hearing marks the next phase of
the committee's work, an effort to
understand why this wave of
anti-semitism
was able so easily to consume the
nation's universities in the first
place. During a congressional hearing on
Tuesday, Republican lawmakers once again
accused university leaders of failing to
do enough to combat anti-semitism on
their campuses. A claim that the
university officials strongly rejected.
>> It is time for clear action on your
campuses that can be quantified
and can be exemplified to the watching
world around. The hearing was the latest
attempt by Republicans to use what they
see as the growing threat against Jews
to their political advantage. And it's a
plan that was first laid out by the same
conservative think tank that authored
Project 2025.
That plan may have once seemed
far-fetched, but today I speak to my
colleague Katie JM Baker about how it's
become a reality.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Wednesday, July 16th.
[Music]
Katie, I think by now we're probably all
familiar with Project 2025. It was the
Heritage Foundation's agenda for a
second Trump term. A lot of it has
already come to pass. But in the
background, there was this entirely
unrelated project from the Heritage
Foundation that I think a lot of people
might still be totally unfamiliar with.
And it's what we wanted to talk to you
about today. Both what it is and also
how it may have been influencing our
politics and our campuses in ways that a
lot of people may not have even
realized.
>> Yeah. So last October, I saw that the
Heritage Foundation had published this
mysterious long policy paper called
Project Esther online that it said was a
national strategy to combat
anti-semitism in the US. But when you
read it, it becomes clear very quickly
that what it really is is a plan to
dismantle the pro Palestinian movement
in the US so that as critics say it can
crush progressive movements more
generally.
>> Project Esther didn't get a lot of
mainstream coverage at the time. Biden
was still president and I think a lot of
it maybe seemed far-fetched to people.
Then fast forward a few months later,
Trump gets elected and very quickly his
administration starts taking actions
that they say are in the name of
combating anti-semitism.
And especially after they arrested
Makmoud Khalil, who was the recent
Colombia graduate who had been really
active in pro Palestinian organizing on
campus, that's when I really started to
feel like we should be tracking all of
the similarities between Project Esther
and the actions the Trump administration
was taking. So tell me about how you
started your investigation and what did
you learn about who's behind Project
Esther and how it came together. So the
origins of this document really begin
immediately after October 7th, 2023,
soon after the Hamas attack in Israel
and then Israel's retaliatory war
campaign. Free Palestine.
[Music]
>> Some college campuses really quickly got
very chaotic with protests and
counterprotest.
>> Start to push them
>> start to push them
>> out of the camp.
>> Out of the camp.
>> There's students out there protesting
against Israel's actions and uh the very
large number of Palestinians, including
so many women and children who were
being killed. peacefully protesting to
end a genocide in Palestine.
>> And then there were Jewish students
saying that Israel has the right to
defend itself and that these students
are being harassed just for being Jewish
by other students on campus.
>> One of the protesters was brandishing a
Hamas flag. As a Jewish student, that's
deeply upsetting.
>> So, it was a really tense time and
there's a lot of concern over what's
happening on these campuses.
>> It seems like every day is getting worse
and worse. Jewish people are being
harassed, being called names.
>> And for Heritage and some of its allies,
that's what they're worried about.
They're worried about what they see as
anti-semitism against the Jewish
students on these campuses.
>> Do you feel safe on campus?
>> No, not at all. I didn't want to be
here.
[Music]
And it's in that context that four
really well-connected conservative
supporters of Israel meet virtually to
come up with a plan. And they decide
that they're going to create this task
force to combat anti-semitism.
And eventually that turns into project
Esther which is overseen by this woman
at heritage vice president named
Victoria Coats.
>> So tell me about Victoria Coats. She is
a fascinating figure
>> because you know this kind of goes back
to my first book which is called David
Sling a history democracy and 10 works
of art.
>> She has a really unorthodox background
for a national security adviser
>> which ties in the art history piece.
>> She has three degrees all in Renaissance
art history and she was planning on
being an academic. When I was getting my
PhD in the 90s,
sure there was a weight toward liberals
in in academia, but at the same time,
the focus was on your work. Some people
thought it was kind of exotic to have a
conservative running around and, you
know, and that was all fine, but
>> and she was conservative and she'd
always been conservative, but she really
started to feel like it wasn't a space
for her and she felt really
uncomfortable there. That was when the
kind of the children or the descendants
rather of the 1960s radicals were really
taking hold. All of whom share this this
what I consider a very noxious
anti-western world view. She became what
she says is increasingly uncomfortable
with I think she called it a noxious
anti-western world view that she felt
she was seeing on the campus of the
University of Pennsylvania where she was
getting her PhD. And I've always been
fascinated with missile defense.
>> And so she started blogging about
missile defense under a pseudonym for a
conservative website.
>> That blogging leads her to working for
Donald Rumsfeld and other Republican
politicians before ending up in Trump's
first administration as a deputy
national security adviser.
>> So how did she go from that to being the
leader of this effort at Heritage?
>> Yeah. So she's a vice president at
Heritage working on a variety of
national security related issues and she
told me that her interest in Israel
really comes from a national security
perspective.
>> Note that in the Iranian view of the
world, America is the big Satan and
Israel is the little Satan. The critical
point being that we are both Satan and
that if we allow the little Satan to be
destroyed, they will hardly stop in
their pursuit of the big Satan.
>> She's a really devout Christian and
religious person. And she's had a
interest in Israel specifically for a
really long time. Um she has like a
figurines of Israeli prime ministers in
her office and she recently wrote a book
about the importance of supporting and
defending Israel. The inescapable
conclusion I reached was that even if
the US was to abandon Israel to its fate
alone and retreat behind our oceans, it
wouldn't save us.
>> So at some point last year, her decides
that they're going to write an actual
blueprint, the one that becomes Project
Esther, and Coats will oversee it.
>> So once Coats is actually put in charge
of leading this thing, what is the next
step?
So dozens of groups joined this task
force and um interesting fact about it
as one of the heritage employees said
himself was that most of them were
conservative organizations or Christian
organizations and there were a few
Jewish groups but the majority of them
are not Jewish. Is it notable that most
of these groups aren't Jewish as you
said especially given the fact that
anti-semitism isn't really what the
Heritage Foundation typically cares
about? Like I think they're generally
associated with issues such as abortion,
immigration, culture wars.
>> Yeah. Well, when I interviewed members
of the task force and heritage, they
said that they felt that like I see
Jewish groups had not done enough to
combat anti-semitism.
And Project Esther accuses American Jews
of complacency and they're saying,
"We're going to take over from here."
That is fascinating that not only is
this not being done in collaboration
with these legacy Jewish groups, but
both very separate from them and in some
cases heritage is even condemning some
of them. What is it that the heritage
group feels should be done to fight
anti-semitism that they feel that these
Jewish groups have not been doing? Like
what is their strategy?
Well, their strategy is to brand a very,
very wide group of critics of Israel and
pro Palestinian
supporters as being a risk to the very
foundations of the United States and the
fabric of our society. So, these people
and groups aren't just anti-Semitic, but
they're anti- capitalist, anti-western,
and anti- what Heritage calls the shared
Judeo-Christian values. they believe are
so integral to America.
>> So in other words, this sudden interest
in anti-semitism, it's not just about
threats against Jewish people. For the
Heritage Foundation, they're seeing
what's happening on campuses and they're
reframing the debate as kind of a
homegrown threat against America. Yes,
exactly. So let's go back to the
document itself and the recommendations.
Well, actually, why the name? Why
Esther?
So the easiest explanation here is that
Esther is a famous figure from the
Hebrew Bible. She's a queen, Jewish
herself, who is celebrated for saving
the Jewish people from destruction. Got
it. So what's actually in the document?
So Project Esther is this really long,
unwieldy document. It has some errors in
it. As many Jewish people pointed out
after it was released, it says that
Queen Esther is a figure from the Torah,
which she is not. And it's divided into
a few parts. It starts out by defining
who the enemy is. So, Project Esther
defines the enemy by branding a really
broad range of critics of Israel and
supporters of pro Palestinian movement
as what it says is effectively a
terrorist support network. So they use
phrases like Hamas Support Organization
or HSO and Hamas Support Network or HSN.
And the goal they say in Project Esther
is that in the same way that Americans
think of the KKK as bad or after 9/11 um
thought of al-Qaeda as bad, they want
people to hear or think of these terms
when they think of the pro Palestinian
movement or critics of Israel and go
these are bad people. And I'm assuming
that it's labeling people who support
the Palestinian cause as connected to
Hamas because it would make the whole
movement seem a lot more threatening,
right? Like by connecting protesters on
college campuses to the actual terror
group operating in the Gaza Strip. Yes,
completely. Their goal was to get the
public to perceive the pro Palestinian
movement as not just as they believe a
threat to Jews, but to America itself.
So who exactly is in the so-called Hamas
support network as the authors of the
report describe it?
>> So they describe it as a network where
at its core there are these well-known
pro Palestinian groups such as National
Students for Justice in Palestine and
then also anti-ionist groups that many
Jewish people are a part of such as
Jewish Voice for Peace. And these groups
were all active in the protests on
college campuses and they strongly deny
being Hamas support organizations to be
clear.
>> Got it. And then outside of this core of
the quote Hamas support network unquote,
there's a network of alleged supporters
and it's a very broad network. It
includes progressive philanthropic
groups and progressive members of
Congress like Ilan Omar and Rashida
Talib who they call the Hamas Caucus and
even Bernie Sanders gets a mention as
someone who is aligned with this
network. I was able to review pitch
materials for potential donors in which
Heritage presented an illustration of a
pyramid topped by what they called
progressive elites leading the way. And
it included Jewish billionaires such as
the philanthropist George Soros and
Governor Pritsker of Illinois. So even
being Jewish doesn't mean you couldn't
be part of the Hamas support network. It
seems like as long as you were on the
left of this particular cause, this
could get you that label.
>> Yeah. Project Esther exclusively focuses
on groups on the left and democratic
politicians. And for Coats and the other
people behind Project Esther, once they
define these groups as supporting
terrorism, the natural next step is to
go after them. And to be clear, is this
so-called Hamas support network a
literal label or is it more of a
metaphor? Like is the Heritage
Foundation arguing that members of this
so-called Hamas support network which
could include college protesters,
members of the American government, are
they arguing that this is literal? Like
these people are actually connected to
Hamas? Yeah, they are arguing that. And
there is some historical context here.
There have long been bipartisan efforts
to counter criticism of Israel by
labeling a range of speech and
organizing in support of Palestinian
rights as support for terrorism. Project
Esther though aims to go further because
it equates actions such as participating
in these pro Palestinian campus protests
with providing material support for
terrorism which is a broad legal
construct that has really serious
consequences. Right? Because just to
state the obvious here, once you are
labeled a terrorist as opposed to a
protester exercising your right to free
speech that suddenly the government has
a lot of other options to go after you.
Yeah, exactly. And project Esther has
lots of ideas of punitive actions that
you can take once you deem people part
of this Hamas support network. So once
they're effectively part of this
network, they can be deported, defunded,
sued, fired, expelled, ostracized, and
otherwise excluded from what Project
Esther calls open society. And what I
think that means is that Heritage's goal
is to make it so that nobody wants to
associate in any way with somebody who
is critical of Israel or supportive of
the pro Palestinian movement. Did
Victoria Coats actually say that to you?
Like I'm just sort of wondering whether
the people behind Project Esther have
made what you just said explicit.
>> Yes, Essentially.
>> I think there's a reason they all wear
masks. They want to participate in this
activity without there being any
ramifications. And I think both
clarifying as I said with whom they are
associating and then revealing your
identity when you participate in this in
this kind of activity, there can be
consequences. And I would I would be
hopeful that that would have a chilling
effect on it. She was not shy about the
way that this reclassification of
student protesters as effectively part
of a terrorist support network can also
allow heritage to not just um go after
pro Palestinian supporters and critics
of Israel, but other progressive
movements on college campuses that they
deemed dangerous in a related way, such
as DEI and Black Lives Matter and and
that type of thing. happen? You know,
how did we get here as the United
States? You know, the folks who defeated
the Nazis, how did we get from that to
what what we're seeing on our campuses
now? And that's an American problem. And
that's why we wanted something like
Project DER so Heritage could take
direct action to counter it. So, it
sounds like this project is laying out a
step-by-step strategy to define a
network of targets, a network of people,
and then systematically eliminate or
exclude them from the American system.
And all of this is being done in the
name of anti-semitism.
Yes. And they say in Project Esther that
they want to dismantle the pro
Palestinian movement and this so-called
Hamas network within 12 to 24 months.
and that as soon as a willing
administration takes over, they're ready
to go.
And I think when Project Esther first
came out, people thought it seemed
far-fetched.
But then just a few months later, when
Trump took office, his administration
and other Republicans started calling
for actions that made it look like these
proposals were coming to life.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Katie, one person I've been thinking
about as you've been talking is Makmoud
Khalil, who you mentioned. He's the man
with the green card who was arrested by
immigration authorities because of his
protest activity at Columbia University.
And his situation seems to fit kind of
perfectly the description of what you
said that Project Esther was trying to
accomplish. And I'm wondering whether
there were other examples that you saw
that really indicated to you that this
project was coming to life.
>> Yeah. So based on our own analysis, the
Trump administration and other
Republicans have called for actions that
appeared to mirror over half of the
goals outlined in Project Esther.
>> Over half. Wow.
>> We have breaking news. The Trump
administration cancelling $400 million
worth of grants and contracts for
Columbia University. says it's freezing
more than $2 billion in grants to
Harvard University,
>> citing what they call consistent
inaction in the face of quote persistent
harassment of Jewish students.
>> So, Project Esther says that HSOS, which
means Hamas support organizations,
should not be eligible for public funds.
And the administration has withheld
billions of dollars in grants to some of
the country's top research universities,
saying that they haven't done enough to
get these sorts of groups off their
campuses or that they haven't kept
Jewish students safe.
If you apply for a visa to enter the
United States and be a student, and you
tell us that the reason why you're
coming to the United States, it's not
just because you want to write opeds,
but because you want to participate in
movements that are involved in doing
things like vandalizing universities,
harassing students, taking over
buildings, creating a ruckus. We're not
going to give you a visa.
>> In Project Esther, it says that members
of HSOS should be found in violation of
student visa requirements. Video shows
Columbia University student Mosen Madawi
in handcuffs. The Palestinian-born green
card holder taken into custody Monday by
federal immigration agents.
>> Threatened with deportation is a
doctoral student at Tus University.
Homeland Security officials accuse her
of being pro- Hamas.
>> And we've seen administration officials
move to revoke student visas and deport
activists who have criticized Israel.
administration ordering embassies to
stop interviews for student visas as the
State Department prepares for an
expanded social media screening for
applicants.
>> Project Esther says that social media
should no longer allow the spread of
what they deem to be anti-semitic
content and we've seen the
administration begin monitoring
immigrants and visa applicants social
media. we're going to take away your
visa and once you've lost your visa,
you're no longer legally in the United
States and we have a right like every
country in the world has a right to
remove you from our country. So, it's
just that simple.
>> I think it's great.
>> That is certainly compelling argument
for how the actions mirror what's in the
report. But just to be really clear
about this, did your reporting reveal a
direct connection between the project
and the White House? Like, can we say
definitively that the White House is
actually using this as a blueprint for
its policies?
No, we can't say that there's a direct
connection because White House officials
would not talk to me about this. And the
Heritage Foundation employees I spoke to
acknowledged that they meet regularly
with the administration and members of
Congress, but they just won't comment on
those closed door meetings. and they
insisted they didn't know if the White
House had used their document or simply
came to the same conclusions. But one of
the co-authors of Project Esther, who I
interviewed, said it's no coincidence to
look at the changing landscape since
Esther came out and to see the actions
that it calls for taking place months
later. and he said that it's no
coincidence on a federal level, on a
state level, and even on behalf of
private groups such as law firms who
have filed lawsuits accusing certain
groups of supporting Kamas.
>> So basically, whether or not we can
actually tie the administration to the
proposal in some way directly, it seems
pretty clear as you mentioned that the
proposals in the project are becoming
reality. And all of this is making me
wonder since Project Esther was
published, has there been much of a
reaction from Jewish groups? So yeah,
there have been a range of responses.
Most legacy Jewish groups haven't said
anything specifically about Project
Esther. They're not celebrating Project
Esther and thinking heritage for solving
anti-semitism, but they're also not
criticizing it either.
>> But there has been a lot of push back
from some other Jewish groups. And one
interesting thing I found is that a few
groups that Heritage assumed would be
aligned with their mission didn't
actually want to be involved at all. Why
is that? Well, one big reason is because
this document is supposed to be about
combating anti-semitism in America. And
yet it exclusively focuses on
anti-semitism on the left, which is a
problem for some of these groups I
talked to because they saw Project
Esther as something that would make this
a partisan issue instead of a a
nonpartisan issue that everybody should
get behind, not just one side or
another. And then the other big reason
that some Jewish groups do not want to
associate with Project Esther is because
of a concern that Heritage is exploiting
real concerns about anti-semitism to
execute its own agenda. To your point,
it really does feel like if this effort
to fight anti-semitism was mostly
endorsed by non-Jews, many prominent
Jewish groups at the very least said
nothing, did not endorse it, or actively
disavowed this effort. It does make me
feel like there's something else on the
agenda here.
>> Yeah, the document is really about a
fundamental distrust of higher education
in particular.
>> Victoria Coats has long spoken about why
she left higher education and how
there's this noxious anti-Western
worldview that's pervasive within it.
And most of their suggestions have to do
with college campuses. And for years,
Heritage has been railing against
college campuses and saying that they're
hotbeds of progressivism. So they were
able to fold this fight against
anti-semitism into this larger worldview
that they have. I mean, to put it
another way, it feels like this document
is about Jews, but it's not actually for
the benefit of Jews.
>> I think it was best stated in an open
letter from three dozen former leaders
of major Jewish establishment groups.
I'm just going to read from the letter.
So they warned that, and I quote, "A
range of actors are using a purported
concern about Jewish safety as a cudgel
to weaken higher education, due process,
checks and balances, freedom of speech,
and the press." And the letter called on
Jewish leaders and organizations to
quote, "Resist the exploitation of
Jewish fears and publicly join with
other organizations that are battling to
preserve the guard rails of democracy.
In other words, what Project Esther has
done is take a real concern about
anti-semitism and then figured out a way
to take that concern and achieve many
other goals that Heritage has. I feel
like Katie, your story really filled in
some blanks that I had just watching
some of the actions from the
administration that were being done in
the name of combating anti-semitism,
whether it's arresting students, cutting
funding, cracking down on pro
Palestinian speech. Like, it just felt
like a lot of this had to do with
something other than combating
anti-semitism. And until your story came
out, I wasn't really sure what to do
with that skepticism or exactly how
warranted it was.
You know, there are surely people who
are part of this effort who genuinely
care about violence against Jewish
people. And there have been examples of
violence in the US targeting Jewish
people, some of them deadly.
But Project Esther isn't just talking
about eliminating threats of or acts of
violence against Jews, which do happen.
They're going much further than that.
And anti-semitism is being used as a
tool here by the Trump administration to
demonize an entire movement and execute
a much, much broader agenda that has
very little to do with protecting Jewish
people.
[Music]
Katie, thank you so much.
Thank you for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, President Trump released
about half of the California National
Guard troops deployed to Los Angeles to
quell protests against immigration
raids. The decision ends the
mobilization of about 2,000 troops and
marks a victory for local officials who
vigorously opposed deploying the troops
in LA in the first place. They said that
it was an illegal act by the president.
And in a rare break from President
Trump, House Speaker Mike Johnson said
the president should release the
government files related to Jeffrey
Epstein, the deceased financeier charged
with the sex trafficking of minors.
>> I'm for transparency. We're
intellectually consistent in this. We
look Reagan used to tell us we should
trust the American people. I believe in
that principle. I know
>> in an interview with a conservative
podcaster, Johnson said that the Trump
administration owed it to their
supporters to disclose as much as
possible.
>> It's a very delicate subject, but we
should we should put everything out
there and let the people decide it.
>> The decision not to release the Epstein
files has infuriated many of Trump's
supporters who want to see for
themselves what is in the documents.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Netszki, Michael Simon Johnson, and Mooj
Sadi with help from Nina Feldman. It was
edited by MJ Davis Lynn and fact checked
by Susan Lee. Contains original music by
Dan Powell and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]